---
layout: post
date: 2024-11-19 11:20:00-0400
inline: true
title: Elected as a Union Steward
---

Columbia postdocs are unionized. They played a significant role in the unionization efforts of postdocs throughout New York City and the United States. Because of the union, salaries have increased, and postdocs have gained many rights and benefits. Personally, I have benefited from a higher salary and a relocation allowance. It is great to be part of this organization.

When I signed up for the union and checked the box indicating that I wanted to get more involved, this meant attending meetings. I do not particularly enjoy this aspect of union organizing, but I understand its importance. I am doing my part by going around campus to gather signatures for petitions and signing people up for the union. This brings me happiness, as I contribute directly to my workplace and surroundings. I can manage the meetings; they are not that bad.

It was not an easy decision to run for election. I do not want to campaign, and I do not need more work than I am already doing. However, people told me that I would continue doing what I typically do and would only need to attend one extra meeting a month. Additionally, no one else was running for the positions, so I agreed. Why not? If no one else is available, I win the election by acclamation. That is what happened.

Let’s see what happens next. I am now a steward for UAW Local 4100

> A steward is an elected representative of the union who assists in enforcing the collective bargaining agreement, represents members in grievance proceedings, and keeps the membership informed about union activities.