---
title: NFC business card
layout: post
date: 2024-03-17
---

I am now a serious man with a PhD, and like every serious man, I need a serious business card. However, in the 2020s, very few people ask for or expect to receive a business card. This is where I got the idea for an NFC business card, which allows you to share all your contact details by simply touching the card with an NFC-enabled phone. Therefore, for this birthday, I requested a set of NFC cards as a present from my partner.

There are services and scammers that offer professional NFC cards, where you can pay 15 EUR for a [pre-made card](https://amzn.eu/d/hFboGpU) with your contact details. However, I chose to spend time making the cards myself to gain experience with this technology.

I discovered that these cards can be programmed for various functions. I found a [set of ten cards](https://amzn.eu/d/0JTDZwO ) online for less than 10 EUR.

The technology involves rechargeable NFC 215 cards, which we can program and reprogram multiple times. I just need to use the [NFC tools](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.wakdev.wdnfc&pcampaignid=web_share) app for reading and writing to the card. It offers many options, from text to contacts, and can even be used for programming Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connections.

I attempted to connect a link to my website, and it works!

However, I was not satisfied with the website because it is not designed for quick contact. It is intended for people to learn about me as a professional scientist. I wanted to create a landing page that allows interested individuals to reach me directly through actionable links, such as sending me an email or following me on Twitter/X.

## Creating the Perfect Landing Page

When it comes to sharing links, we often turn to popular platforms like Linktree or Linkinbio. However, I've never been a fan of these options because they all look the same and lack that personal touch I want to convey. That's when I discovered [mmm.page](https://mmm.page/). I absolutely love its philosophy: it views the internet as a canvas, and you, the artist, are free to paint or embed dynamic content as you wish. It’s like creating back-of-napkin notes but in a digital format.

Using this platform, I crafted my own unique landing page at [nimesh.mmm.page](https://nimesh.mmm.page/), and I must say, it’s way more fun than any of those typical link-in-bio pages. My page features a brief bio, adorned with a delightful mix of GIFs, including Newton and Curie, along with a chicken and a microscope. It’s a quirky representation of me that stands out from the crowd!

## Special links

One of the standout features of this landing page, in my opinion, is the ability to create links. The email link, for instance, drafts an email directly from your phone to me, complete with a pre-filled subject and body text. Check out the following hyperlink:

```html
href="mailto:YOURMAIL?subject=Hello!&body=we%20just%20met.%20lets%20stay%20in%20touch"
```

The Twitter link directs you to my profile and allows you to follow me.

```html
https://twitter.com/intent/user?screen_name=onenimesa
```

You can also text me on WhatsApp, which functions similarly. You can find this link in your profile section, where you can share the contact as a QR code.

Ultimately, the phone number part is quite simple.

```html
tel:XXXXXXXXX
```

## Conclusion

It was a pleasant experience creating NFC business cards. I am very pleased to have learned how to design an attractive landing page with actionable links.

However, the card still appears somewhat unappealing since it is merely a plain white card. In the future, I could design a card and print a sticker to place on top of it. For now, I have chosen to use a Sharpie to write down my details, which doesn't look too bad. In the future, I will include a QR code for those who do not have NFC.